---
layout: post
title: "Coding and Cookies Session 4: CSS Recap"
date:   2015-11-05 12:00:00
categories: tutorials recap
---
#CSS: make it pretty
If you want to take the quiz as you read the resources, it's at [quiz.hugodf.xyz](http://quiz.hugodf.xyz).  
For the HTML and jQuery tutorials [click here](/tutorials/2015/11/05/recap.html)

Cascading Style Sheets or CSS is the styling format of the web. Where HTML says **what things are**, CSS says **what they look like**.

## The syntax
Here's a sample CSS declaration:

```css
body{
  background-color: blue;
  font-size: 16px;
}
```

Let's break it down:  
- `body` is what we call the selector
- `background-color` and `font-size` are the properties or rules
- `blue` and `16px` are the values attached to those properties

The syntax goes a bit like this, I have a **selector**, the rules for it are going to go inside a pair of curly braces (`{rules}`). Each **rule declaration** has a **property name** and a **value**, separated by a **colon** (`:`). The rule itself is terminated by a **semicolon** (`;`).

## The cascade
What does cascading in **cascading** style sheet mean?

It means that the last declaration for something holds.

In

```css
body{
  color: red;
  color: green;
}
```

`color: green` is the rule that holds (the colour of the text inside `body` will be green).

## Element selectors

The simplest selectors are **element selectors**. You literally type the name of the element you're trying to select.

eg.

```css
body{
  //some rules
}
p{
  //some rules
}
h1{
  //some rules
}
```

## Class/id selectors

Remember the `id` and `class` attributes?

Here's how we use them.

To select an element with `id` `some-id`:

```css
#some-id{
  //some rules  
}
```

That's right, preprend the `id` name with a `#`.

To select all the elements that have `class` `some-class`:

```css
.some-class{
  //some rules
}
```

That's right, prepend the `class` name with a `.`.

## Multi-selector blocks

Now let's say we want to apply the same rules to a couple of selectors. We could just put them like this.

```css
p{
  color: red;
}
h1{
  color: red;
}
```

But that's double the typing when we could just do this:

```css
p, h1{
  color: red;
}
```

Of course that means that if you want to change the rule, you only have to do it in one place :).

## Nested selectors

What about if we want to select an element only if it's within another element?

Here's how to do that:

```css
.navbar .button{
  color: orange;
}
```

This rule will only apply to `.button`s that are inside a `.navbar` element.

## Attribute selection

You can also select elements according to an attribute. This is especially useful for `input` fields. All you have to do is wrap the attribute name in `[]`.

```css
input[type=email]{
  //some rule
}
input[type=password]{
  //some other rule
}
```

**Note:** we don't have `''` or `""` around the attribute value... because we're in CSS and that's the way it is :)

## Text stuff

Onto some rules to style text:  
- `font-size`: size of the text in `px`, `pt`, `em` or `rem` (those are the measurement units in CSS)  
- `font-weight`: how bold the weight is, scale from 100-900 or one of `lighter/normal/bold`
- `text-decoration`: one of `underline/overline/line-through`  
- `font-style`: usually useful to make things `italic` and that's the value to do that as well  
- `font-family`: what font we're using, look into google fonts if you want to use fancy fonts. You have to load a font before using it so you're relying on the user having that font installed. Otherwise `Helvetica`, `Helvetica Neue`, `sans-serif`, `serif` are pretty reliable ones  
- `color`: changes the colour of the text, values are either `white/blue/...`, HEX numbers `#000`/`#332211` (these describe the amount of red, green and blue in the colour `0` being the lowest and `f` being the highest), or `rgb(0-255, 0-255, 0-255)` values (again the numbers are between 0 and 255, first one corresponds to red, second to green, thirds to blue).

## Borders and border-radius

You can set a border like so:

Shorthand

```css
  border: solid 1px red;
```

This will give you a border that is 1px wide, solid and red.

Longhand

```css
border-width: 1px;
border-color: red;
border-style: solid;
```

- `border-width` and `border-color` behave like `width` and `color`. They take respectively size units and colour units
- `border-style` is one of `solid/dotted/double/inset/...`

You can look up all of these properties and more on Google and [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/) (Mozilla Developer Network)
> Alright that's it for CSS. Take the quiz at [quiz.hugodf.xyz](http://quiz.hugodf.xyz) to test out your new-found knowledge :).

>For the HTML and jQuery tutorials [click here](/tutorials/2015/11/05/recap.html)